## Canvas Formatted Text - Community Meeting
### <strike>11 August 2021, 1500 UTC</strike>
### 18 August 2021, 1500 UTC

| Meeting info | |
|---|----|
| Video conference link | meet.google.com/bxm-snaa-pgr |
| IRC | **#formatted-text** (irc.w3.org) |

### Agenda

* Meeting boilerplate (scribe, [CEPC](https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/))
* Overview of current status
* Review draft [text metrics API](../explainer-metrics.md) and [rendering](../explainer-rendering.md)
* Talk about use cases for per-glyph rendering

### Present

* Aaron Krajeski - Google
* Fernando Serboncini - Google
* Heather Miller - Google
* Julia Lavrova - Google
* Mike Reed - Google
* Mouad Debbar - Google
* Sushanth Rajasankar - Microsoft
* Travis Leithead - Microsoft
* Yegor Jbanov - Google

### Summary

* Biggest concern: ensure the data model (discussed last meeting) can run in workers--this is core to various requirements.
* Clarity sought on the necessary parameters to `.format()`; is `inlineSize` enough?
* Debate about the lifecycle model for metrics; will want to prototype and wait and see what mitigating steps are necessary. Leaning toward create a new set of metrics objects each call.
* Glyph relationships with respect to the source text is a many-to-many relationship. Graphemes not covered. This is a lot of complexity (especially for editing scenarios and caret movement logic). Consider simplifying and focusing on rendering needs only (e.g., size and position) if possible.
  * In most N-to-N mappings, knowing **why** they are mapped that way is important (Arabic decomposition different from emoji)
* Clarify the order that things are put into the lists (especially at the fragment level): visual order or sourc order? Will matter for bidi formatted runs.
* Be sure to note the focus on downloaded fonts for low-level glyph id/font info; will be not-available for installed fonts (for privacy reasons)
* For "render your own glyph" cases, glyph ID and actual selected font (when the font is a downloaded font) are critical pieces.
* Consider indicating when font-selection may have failed to resolve the character (which can happen). Glyph id 0 is usually reserved for this.

### Next steps

* Work on explainer design changes to the metrics doc given above feedback.
* Work on prototype code to enable worker scenarios.

### Meeting Minutes

[HTML formatted minutes](https://www.w3.org/2021/08/18-formatted-text-minutes.html)
